In this lesson, we're focusing on three
closely related inhalation
injuries you will see in critical care and
emergency settings.
Smoke inhalation, thermal lung injury, and
carbon monoxide intoxication.
These conditions often occur together,
especially in patients rescued from
fires.
And your job as an RT is to quickly
recognize what's happening,
what's most dangerous right now, and what
needs to be
treated first.
Let's start with the big picture.
Smoke inhalation introduces toxic
particles and chemicals into the airway.
This leads to airway inflammation,
bronchospasm,
and mucus production.
Very similar to obstructive processes you
already know, but often
more acute and severe.
Thermal injury primarily affects the upper
airway.
Heat causes swelling of the airway
tissues, which can rapidly
progress to obstruction.
This is why early airway assessment is
critical.
If you wait too long, intubation may
become extremely difficult
or impossible.
Now, carbon monoxide intoxication is a
completely different problem.
It's not a ventilation issue, it's an
oxygen transport problem.
Carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin with a
much higher affinity than oxygen,
forming arboxyhemoglobin.
This prevents oxygen from being delivered
to tissues, even if
the patient's lungs are moving air
normally.
Here's the key RT insight.
Pulse oximetry can look normal in carbon
monoxide poisoning.
So if you rely only on SpO2, you can miss
a life-threatening hypoxia.
Instead, you need to think clinically.
Look for exposure history, symptoms like
headache,
confusion, dizziness, and confirm with CO
oximetry when available.
From a cause-to-effect standpoint, smoke
and toxins,
right-pointing arrow, airway inflammation
and obstruction.
Heat, right-pointing arrow, upper airway
swelling.
Carbon monoxide, right-pointing arrow,
impaired
oxygen delivery.
Now let's talk priorities.
First, airway.
Look for signs like hoarseness, soot,
burns, or stridor.
These are red flags for impending airway
compromise.
Second, oxygenation.
High-flow oxygen is critical, especially
for carbon monoxide poisoning,
because it helps displace CO from
hemoglobin.
Third, ventilation and airway clearance.
Monitor for bronchospasm, secretions, and
worsening
work of breathing.
And finally, escalation.
If the patient shows signs of fatigue,
altered mental status,
or airway compromise, you need to act
quickly.
From a board prep perspective, remember
this.
Normal SpO2 does not rule out CO
poisoning.
Upper airway burns can deteriorate
rapidly.
Early intervention saves airways.
As the RT, your role is to recognize the
pattern,
prioritize airway and oxygen delivery, and
continuously reassess for deterioration.
That's the foundation you'll build on as
we move through this lesson.